README.md, before:

# adonis-bumblebee

API Transformer Provider for the AdonisJs framework. This library provides a
presentation and transformation layer for complex data output.

<br />
<hr />
<br />

[![Greenkeeper][greenkeeper-image]][greenkeeper-url]
[![NPM Version][npm-image]][npm-url]
[![Build Status][travis-image]][travis-url]
[![Codecov][codecov-image]][codecov-url]

[greenkeeper-image]: https://badges.greenkeeper.io/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee.svg
[greenkeeper-url]: https://greenkeeper.io

[npm-image]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/adonis-bumblebee.svg?style=flat-square
[npm-url]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/adonis-bumblebee

[travis-image]: https://img.shields.io/travis/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee/master.svg?style=flat-square
[travis-url]: https://travis-ci.org/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee

[codecov-image]: https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee.svg?style=flat-square
[codecov-url]: https://codecov.io/gh/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee



## Goals
 - Create a “barrier” between source data and output, so changes to your models
   do not affect API response
 - Include relationships for complex data structures
 - Manipulate and typecast data in one place only



## Table of contents

  * [Installation](#installation)
  * [Simple Example](#simple-example)
  * [Resources](#resources)
  * [Transformers](#transformers)
    * [Transformer Classes](#transformer-classes)
    * [Including Data](#including-data)
        * [Default Include](#default-include)
        * [Available Include](#available-include)
        * [Parse available includes automatically](#parse-available-includes-automatically)
    * [Transformer Variants](#transformer-variants)
  * [EagerLoading](#eagerloading)
  * [Serializers](#serializers)
    * [PlainSerializer](#plainserializer)
    * [DataSerializer](#dataserializer)
  * [Pagination](#pagination)    
  * [Fluent Interface](#fluent-interface)
  * [Credits](#credits)



## Installation

Run this command to install the package and follow the instructions in
[instructions.md](instructions.md).

```sh
adonis install adonis-bumblebee
```



## Simple Example

For the sake of simplicity, this example has been put together as one simple
route function. In reality, you would create dedicated Transformer classes for
each model. But we will get there, let's first have a look at this:

```js
Route.get('/', async ({ response, transform }) => {
  const users = await User.all()

  return transform.collection(users, user => ({
    firstname: user.first_name,
    lastname: user.last_name
  }))
})
```

You may notice a few things here: First, we can import `transform` from the
context, and then call a method `collection` on it. This method is called a
[resources](#resources) and we will cover it in the next section. We pass our
data to this method along with a [transformer](#transformers). In return, we get
the transformed data back.



## Resources

Resources are objects that represent data and have knowledge of a “Transformer”.
There are two types of resources:

- **Item** - A singular resource, probably one entry in a data store
- **Collection** - A collection of resources

The resource accepts an object or an array as the first argument, representing
the data that should be transformed. The second argument is the transformer used
for this resource.



## Transformers

The simplest transformer you can write is a callback transformer. Just return an
object that maps your data.

```js
const users = await User.all()

return transform.collection(users, user => ({
  firstname: user.first_name,
  lastname: user.last_name
}))
```

But let's be honest, this is not what you want. And we would agree with you, so
let's have a look at transformer classes.


### Transformer Classes

The recommended way to use transformers is to create a transformer class. This
allows the transformer to be easily reused in multiple places.

#### Creating a Transformer

You can let bumblebee generate the transformer for you by running:

```sh
adonis make:transformer User
```

The command will create a new classfile in `app/Transformers/`. You can also
create the class yourself, you just have to make sure that the class extends
`Bumblebee/Transformer` and implements at least a `transform` method.

```js
const BumblebeeTransformer = use('Bumblebee/Transformer')

class UserTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  transform (model) {
    return {
      id: model.id,

      firstname: model.first_name,
      lastname: model.last_name
    }
  }
}

module.exports = UserTransformer
```

*Note:* You also get the `context` as the second argument in the `transform`
method. Through this, you can access the current request or the authenticated
user.

*Note:* A transformer can also return a primitive type, like a string or a
number, instead of an object. But keep in mind that including additional data,
as covered in the next section, only work when an object is returned.

#### Using the Transformer

Once the Transformer class is defined, it can be passed to the resource as the
second argument.

```js
const users = await User.all()

return transform.collection(users, 'App/Transformers/UserTransformer')
```

*Note:* Passing the Transformer as the second argument will terminate the fluent
interface. If you want to chain more methods after the call to `collection` or
`item` you should only pass the first argument and then use the `transformWith`
method to define the transformer. See [Fluent Interface](#fluent-interface).


### Including Data

When transforming a model, you may want to include some additional data. For
example, you may have a book model and want to include the author for the book
in the same resource. Include methods let you do just that. 


#### Default Include

Includes defined in the `defaultInclude` getter will always be included in the
returned data.

You have to specify the name of the include by returning an array of all
includes from the `defaultInclude` getter. Then you create an additional method
for each include, named like in the example: `include{Name}`.

The include method returns a new resource, that can either be an `item` or a
`collection`.  See [Resources](#resources).

```js
class BookTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  static get defaultInclude () {
    return [
      'author'
    ]
  }

  transform (book) {
    return {
      id: book.id,
      title: book.title,
      year: book.yr
    }
  }

  includeAuthor (book) {
    return this.item(book.getRelated('author'), AuthorTransformer)
  }
}

module.exports = BookTransformer
```

*Note:* Just like in the transform method, you can also access to the `context`
through the second argument.

*Note:* If you have hyphen or underscore separated properties, you would name
the include function in camelCase. The conversion is done automatically.


#### Available Include

An `availableInclude` is almost the same as a `defaultInclude`, except it is not
included by default.

```js
class BookTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  static get availableInclude () {
    return [
      'author'
    ]
  }

  transform (book) {
    return {
      id: book.id,
      title: book.title,
      year: book.yr
    }
  }

  includeAuthor (book) {
    return this.item(book.getRelated('author'), AuthorTransformer)
  }
}

module.exports = BookTransformer
```

To include this resource you call the `include()` method before transforming.

```js
return transform.include('author').item(book, BookTransformer)
```

These includes can be nested with dot notation too, to include resources within
other resources.

```js
return transform.include('author,publisher.something').item(book, BookTransformer)
```


#### Parse available includes automatically

In addition to the previously mentioned `include` method, you can also enable
`parseRequest` in the config file. Now bumblebee will automatically parse the
`?include=` GET parameter and include the requested resources.


### Transformer Variants

Sometimes you may want to transform some model in a slitely different way while
sill utilizing existing include methods. To use out book example, you may have
an api endpoint that returns a list of all books, but you don't want to include
the summary of the book in this response to save on data. However, when
requesting a single book you want the summary to be included.

You could define a separate transformer for this, but it would be much easier if
you could reuse the existing book transformer. This is where transform variants
come in play.

```js
class BookTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  transform (book) {
    return {
      id: book.id,
      title: book.title,
      year: book.yr
    }
  }

  transformWithSummary (book) {
    return {
      ...this.transform(book),
      summary: book.summary
    }
  }
}

module.exports = BookTransformer
```

We define a `transformWithSummary` method that calls our existing `transform`
method and adds the book summary to the result.

Now we can use this variant by specifing it as follows:

```js
return transform.collection(books, 'App/Transformers/BookTransformer.withSummary')
```



## EagerLoading

When you include additional models in your transformer be sure to eager load
these relations as this can quickly turn into n+1 database queries. If you have
defaultIncludes you should load them with your initial query. In addition,
bumblebee will try to load related data if the include method is named the same
as the relation.

To ensure the eager-loaded data is used, you should always use the
`.getRelated()` method on the model.



## Metadata

Sometimes you need to add just a little bit of extra information about your
model or response. For these situations, we have the `meta` method. 

```js
const User = use('App/Models/User')

const users = await User.all()

return transform
  .meta({ 
    access: 'limited'
  })
  .collection(users, UserTransformer)
```

How this data is added to the response is dependent on the
[Serializer](#serializers).



## Pagination

When dealing with large amounts of data, it can be useful to paginate your API
responses to keep them lean. Adonis provides the `paginate` method on the query
builder to do this on the database level. You can then pass the paginated models
to the `paginate` method of bumblebee and your response will be transformed
accordingly. The pagination information will be included under the `pagination`
namespace.

```js
const User = use('App/Models/User')
const page = 1

const users = await User.query().paginate(page)

return transform.paginate(users, UserTransformer)
```



## Serializers

After your data passed through the transformer, it has to pass through one more
layer. The `Serializer` will form your data into its final structure. The
default serializer is the `PlainSerializer` but you can change this in the
settings. For smaller APIs, the PlainSerializer works fine, but for larger
projects, you should consider the `DataSerializer`.


### PlainSerializer

This is the simplest serializer. It does not add any namespaces to the
data. It is also compatible with the default structure that you get when you
return a lucid model from a route.

```js
// Item
{
  foo: 'bar'
}

// Collection
[
  {
    foo: bar
  },
  {...}
]
```

There is one major drawback to this serializer. It does not play nicely with metadata:

```js
// Item with meta
{
  foo: 'bar',
  meta: {
    ...
  }
}

// Collection
{
  data: [
    {...}
  ],
  meta: {
    ...
  }
}
```

Since you cannot mix an Array and Objects in JSON, the serializer has to add a
`data` property if you use metadata on a collection. The same is true if you use
pagination. This is why we do not recommend using `PlainSerializer` when using
these features. But other than that, this serializer works great for small and
simple APIs.


### DataSerializer

This serializer adds the `data` namespace to all of its items:

```js
// Item
{
  data: {
    foo: 'bar'
  }
}

// Collection
{
  data: [
    {
      foo: bar
    },
    {...}
  ]
}
```

The advantage over the `PlainSerializer` is that it does not conflict with meta
and pagination:

```js
// Item with meta
{
  data: {
    foo: 'bar'
  },
  meta: {
    ...
  }
}

// Collection
{
  data: [
    {...}
  ],
  meta: {...},
  pagination: {...}
}
```



## Fluent Interface

Bumblebee has a fluent interface for all the setter methods. This means you can
chain method calls which makes the API more readable. The following methods are
available on the `transform` object in the context and from `Bumblebee.create()`
(see below).

**Chainable methods:**
- `collection(data)`
- `item(data)`
- `null(data)`
- `paginate(data)`
- `meta(metadata)`
- `transformWith(transformer)`
- `usingVariant(variant)`
- `withContext(ctx)`
- `include(include)`
- `setSerializer(serializer)`
- `serializeWith(serializer)` (alias for `setSerializer`)

**Terminating methods:**
- `collection(data, transformer)`
- `item(data, transformer)`
- `paginate(data, transformer)`
- `toJSON()`


You may want to use the transformer somewhere other than in a controller. You
can import bumblebee directly by the following method:

```js
const Bumblebee = use('Adonis/Addons/Bumblebee')

let transformed = await Bumblebee.create()
    .collection(data)
    .transformWith(BookTransformer)
    .withContext(ctx)
    .toJSON()
```

You can use the same methods as in a controller. With one difference: If you
need the `context` inside the transformer, you have to set it with the
`.withContext(ctx)` method since it is not automatically injected.



## Credits

Special thanks to the creator(s) of [Fractal], a PHP API transformer that was
the main inspiration for this package. Also, a huge thank goes to the creator(s)
of [AdonisJS] for creating such an awesome framework.

[Fractal]: https://fractal.thephpleague.com
[AdonisJS]: http://adonisjs.com

Commit message:

feat(namespace): auto resolve namespace (#33)

README.md, after:

# adonis-bumblebee

API Transformer Provider for the AdonisJs framework. This library provides a
presentation and transformation layer for complex data output.

<br />
<hr />
<br />

[![Greenkeeper][greenkeeper-image]][greenkeeper-url]
[![NPM Version][npm-image]][npm-url]
[![Build Status][travis-image]][travis-url]
[![Codecov][codecov-image]][codecov-url]

[greenkeeper-image]: https://badges.greenkeeper.io/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee.svg
[greenkeeper-url]: https://greenkeeper.io

[npm-image]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/adonis-bumblebee.svg?style=flat-square
[npm-url]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/adonis-bumblebee

[travis-image]: https://img.shields.io/travis/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee/master.svg?style=flat-square
[travis-url]: https://travis-ci.org/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee

[codecov-image]: https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee.svg?style=flat-square
[codecov-url]: https://codecov.io/gh/rhwilr/adonis-bumblebee



## Goals
 - Create a “barrier” between source data and output, so changes to your models
   do not affect API response
 - Include relationships for complex data structures
 - Manipulate and typecast data in one place only



## Table of contents

  * [Installation](#installation)
  * [Simple Example](#simple-example)
  * [Resources](#resources)
  * [Transformers](#transformers)
    * [Transformer Classes](#transformer-classes)
    * [Including Data](#including-data)
        * [Default Include](#default-include)
        * [Available Include](#available-include)
        * [Parse available includes automatically](#parse-available-includes-automatically)
    * [Transformer Variants](#transformer-variants)
  * [EagerLoading](#eagerloading)
  * [Serializers](#serializers)
    * [PlainSerializer](#plainserializer)
    * [DataSerializer](#dataserializer)
  * [Pagination](#pagination)    
  * [Fluent Interface](#fluent-interface)
  * [Credits](#credits)



## Installation

Run this command to install the package and follow the instructions in
[instructions.md](instructions.md).

```sh
adonis install adonis-bumblebee
```



## Simple Example

For the sake of simplicity, this example has been put together as one simple
route function. In reality, you would create dedicated Transformer classes for
each model. But we will get there, let's first have a look at this:

```js
Route.get('/', async ({ response, transform }) => {
  const users = await User.all()

  return transform.collection(users, user => ({
    firstname: user.first_name,
    lastname: user.last_name
  }))
})
```

You may notice a few things here: First, we can import `transform` from the
context, and then call a method `collection` on it. This method is called a
[resources](#resources) and we will cover it in the next section. We pass our
data to this method along with a [transformer](#transformers). In return, we get
the transformed data back.



## Resources

Resources are objects that represent data and have knowledge of a “Transformer”.
There are two types of resources:

- **Item** - A singular resource, probably one entry in a data store
- **Collection** - A collection of resources

The resource accepts an object or an array as the first argument, representing
the data that should be transformed. The second argument is the transformer used
for this resource.



## Transformers

The simplest transformer you can write is a callback transformer. Just return an
object that maps your data.

```js
const users = await User.all()

return transform.collection(users, user => ({
  firstname: user.first_name,
  lastname: user.last_name
}))
```

But let's be honest, this is not what you want. And we would agree with you, so
let's have a look at transformer classes.


### Transformer Classes

The recommended way to use transformers is to create a transformer class. This
allows the transformer to be easily reused in multiple places.

#### Creating a Transformer

You can let bumblebee generate the transformer for you by running:

```sh
adonis make:transformer User
```

The command will create a new classfile in `app/Transformers/`. You can also
create the class yourself, you just have to make sure that the class extends
`Bumblebee/Transformer` and implements at least a `transform` method.

```js
const BumblebeeTransformer = use('Bumblebee/Transformer')

class UserTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  transform (model) {
    return {
      id: model.id,

      firstname: model.first_name,
      lastname: model.last_name
    }
  }
}

module.exports = UserTransformer
```

*Note:* You also get the `context` as the second argument in the `transform`
method. Through this, you can access the current request or the authenticated
user.

*Note:* A transformer can also return a primitive type, like a string or a
number, instead of an object. But keep in mind that including additional data,
as covered in the next section, only work when an object is returned.

#### Using the Transformer

Once the transformer class is defined, it can be passed to the resource as the
second argument.

```js
const users = await User.all()

return transform.collection(users, 'UserTransformer')
```

If the transformer was placed in the default location `App/Transformers`, you
can reference it by just passing the name of the transformer. If you placed the
transformer class somewhere else or use a different path for your transformers,
you may have to pass the full namespace or change the default namespace in the
config file. Lastly, you can also pass a reference to the transformer class
directly.

*Note:* Passing the transformer as the second argument will terminate the fluent
interface. If you want to chain more methods after the call to `collection` or
`item` you should only pass the first argument and then use the `transformWith`
method to define the transformer. See [Fluent Interface](#fluent-interface)


### Including Data

When transforming a model, you may want to include some additional data. For
example, you may have a book model and want to include the author for the book
in the same resource. Include methods let you do just that. 


#### Default Include

Includes defined in the `defaultInclude` getter will always be included in the
returned data.

You have to specify the name of the include by returning an array of all
includes from the `defaultInclude` getter. Then you create an additional method
for each include, named like in the example: `include{Name}`.

The include method returns a new resource, that can either be an `item` or a
`collection`.  See [Resources](#resources).

```js
class BookTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  static get defaultInclude () {
    return [
      'author'
    ]
  }

  transform (book) {
    return {
      id: book.id,
      title: book.title,
      year: book.yr
    }
  }

  includeAuthor (book) {
    return this.item(book.getRelated('author'), AuthorTransformer)
  }
}

module.exports = BookTransformer
```

*Note:* Just like in the transform method, you can also access to the `context`
through the second argument.

*Note:* If you have hyphen or underscore separated properties, you would name
the include function in camelCase. The conversion is done automatically.


#### Available Include

An `availableInclude` is almost the same as a `defaultInclude`, except it is not
included by default.

```js
class BookTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  static get availableInclude () {
    return [
      'author'
    ]
  }

  transform (book) {
    return {
      id: book.id,
      title: book.title,
      year: book.yr
    }
  }

  includeAuthor (book) {
    return this.item(book.getRelated('author'), AuthorTransformer)
  }
}

module.exports = BookTransformer
```

To include this resource you call the `include()` method before transforming.

```js
return transform.include('author').item(book, BookTransformer)
```

These includes can be nested with dot notation too, to include resources within
other resources.

```js
return transform.include('author,publisher.something').item(book, BookTransformer)
```


#### Parse available includes automatically

In addition to the previously mentioned `include` method, you can also enable
`parseRequest` in the config file. Now bumblebee will automatically parse the
`?include=` GET parameter and include the requested resources.


### Transformer Variants

Sometimes you may want to transform some model in a slitely different way while
sill utilizing existing include methods. To use out book example, you may have
an api endpoint that returns a list of all books, but you don't want to include
the summary of the book in this response to save on data. However, when
requesting a single book you want the summary to be included.

You could define a separate transformer for this, but it would be much easier if
you could reuse the existing book transformer. This is where transform variants
come in play.

```js
class BookTransformer extends BumblebeeTransformer {
  transform (book) {
    return {
      id: book.id,
      title: book.title,
      year: book.yr
    }
  }

  transformWithSummary (book) {
    return {
      ...this.transform(book),
      summary: book.summary
    }
  }
}

module.exports = BookTransformer
```

We define a `transformWithSummary` method that calls our existing `transform`
method and adds the book summary to the result.

Now we can use this variant by specifing it as follows:

```js
return transform.collection(books, 'App/Transformers/BookTransformer.withSummary')
```



## EagerLoading

When you include additional models in your transformer be sure to eager load
these relations as this can quickly turn into n+1 database queries. If you have
defaultIncludes you should load them with your initial query. In addition,
bumblebee will try to load related data if the include method is named the same
as the relation.

To ensure the eager-loaded data is used, you should always use the
`.getRelated()` method on the model.



## Metadata

Sometimes you need to add just a little bit of extra information about your
model or response. For these situations, we have the `meta` method. 

```js
const User = use('App/Models/User')

const users = await User.all()

return transform
  .meta({ 
    access: 'limited'
  })
  .collection(users, UserTransformer)
```

How this data is added to the response is dependent on the
[Serializer](#serializers).



## Pagination

When dealing with large amounts of data, it can be useful to paginate your API
responses to keep them lean. Adonis provides the `paginate` method on the query
builder to do this on the database level. You can then pass the paginated models
to the `paginate` method of bumblebee and your response will be transformed
accordingly. The pagination information will be included under the `pagination`
namespace.

```js
const User = use('App/Models/User')
const page = 1

const users = await User.query().paginate(page)

return transform.paginate(users, UserTransformer)
```



## Serializers

After your data passed through the transformer, it has to pass through one more
layer. The `Serializer` will form your data into its final structure. The
default serializer is the `PlainSerializer` but you can change this in the
settings. For smaller APIs, the PlainSerializer works fine, but for larger
projects, you should consider the `DataSerializer`.


### PlainSerializer

This is the simplest serializer. It does not add any namespaces to the
data. It is also compatible with the default structure that you get when you
return a lucid model from a route.

```js
// Item
{
  foo: 'bar'
}

// Collection
[
  {
    foo: bar
  },
  {...}
]
```

There is one major drawback to this serializer. It does not play nicely with metadata:

```js
// Item with meta
{
  foo: 'bar',
  meta: {
    ...
  }
}

// Collection
{
  data: [
    {...}
  ],
  meta: {
    ...
  }
}
```

Since you cannot mix an Array and Objects in JSON, the serializer has to add a
`data` property if you use metadata on a collection. The same is true if you use
pagination. This is why we do not recommend using `PlainSerializer` when using
these features. But other than that, this serializer works great for small and
simple APIs.


### DataSerializer

This serializer adds the `data` namespace to all of its items:

```js
// Item
{
  data: {
    foo: 'bar'
  }
}

// Collection
{
  data: [
    {
      foo: bar
    },
    {...}
  ]
}
```

The advantage over the `PlainSerializer` is that it does not conflict with meta
and pagination:

```js
// Item with meta
{
  data: {
    foo: 'bar'
  },
  meta: {
    ...
  }
}

// Collection
{
  data: [
    {...}
  ],
  meta: {...},
  pagination: {...}
}
```



## Fluent Interface

Bumblebee has a fluent interface for all the setter methods. This means you can
chain method calls which makes the API more readable. The following methods are
available on the `transform` object in the context and from `Bumblebee.create()`
(see below).

**Chainable methods:**
- `collection(data)`
- `item(data)`
- `null(data)`
- `paginate(data)`
- `meta(metadata)`
- `transformWith(transformer)`
- `usingVariant(variant)`
- `withContext(ctx)`
- `include(include)`
- `setSerializer(serializer)`
- `serializeWith(serializer)` (alias for `setSerializer`)

**Terminating methods:**
- `collection(data, transformer)`
- `item(data, transformer)`
- `paginate(data, transformer)`
- `toJSON()`


You may want to use the transformer somewhere other than in a controller. You
can import bumblebee directly by the following method:

```js
const Bumblebee = use('Adonis/Addons/Bumblebee')

let transformed = await Bumblebee.create()
    .collection(data)
    .transformWith(BookTransformer)
    .withContext(ctx)
    .toJSON()
```

You can use the same methods as in a controller. With one difference: If you
need the `context` inside the transformer, you have to set it with the
`.withContext(ctx)` method since it is not automatically injected.



## Credits

Special thanks to the creator(s) of [Fractal], a PHP API transformer that was
the main inspiration for this package. Also, a huge thank goes to the creator(s)
of [AdonisJS] for creating such an awesome framework.

[Fractal]: https://fractal.thephpleague.com
[AdonisJS]: http://adonisjs.com
